[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I grew up around
Native American people,
primarily the
Cheyenne and the Crow.
I remember coming
home one day, and we
were going to go into one of the
kids' tepees with his parents,
and the mother said,
take your shoes off.
they'll make you sick.
It was just strange
why she would
say they would make you sick.
I wouldn't have had
a clue at that time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In simple terms, grounding
is literally putting your bare
feet on the ground.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When you do that, you're
in contact with the Earth,
and Mother Earth is
endowed with electrons.
And these electrons
are literally
absorbed through your feet.
It's like taking
handfuls of antioxidants,
but you're getting
it through the feet.
>> Grounding means connecting
to the Earth to support
the specific function of
the organs of your body.
It supports the body as a
whole, but it specifically
supports organ systems
down to the tissues,
and the cellular function
of the entire body.
>> In 1960, we invented
synthetic materials.
The first thing we did
was we put rubber sole,
synthetic soles on the shoes.
We started wearing sneakers.
>> So it's the most common sense
thing that we are organisms
that live and grow and depend
entirely on the Earth while
we're alive.
And yet, we have completely
isolated ourself from it.
We're so disconnected that it
becomes this weird thing if we
actually slip our shoes off.
>> 95% of people walk
insulated on the Earth.
>> This was the single thing
that happened that probably
caused the proliferation of
inflammation-related health
disorders far and
above anything else.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is so incredible.
This is Nobel Prize material.
>> I got involved in the cable
industry in the early 60s.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I first learned the need
to ground cable signals
as we were developing
the industry.
When you run a wire
into the house,
before you can go
you have to ground the cable.
I mean, you have miles of wire
hanging up there in the air,
if there's lightning in the air,
it's going to hit the cable.
And so what you want
to do is create a path
to ground for the
lightning so that it
doesn't enter the house, or blow
up the TV, or create a fire.
One day, I was
sitting at a computer,
and the computer kept crashing.
I know it was
static electricity,
so I put a piece of tape
across my desk and grounded it.
Then I realized in that
process that the outlet wasn't
grounded, so I fixed it
so that I could get rid
of the static electricity.
And I didn't think
too much about it.
I walked outdoors
and I sat on a bench.
This tour bus pulled up, and
it looked like they had just
been to one of
these outlet malls,
and white Nike
shoes were on sale.
It just dawned on me, I
asked the question, I said,
I wonder if it's possible
that humans are--
we're no longer
naturally grounded.
I wonder if these shoes
could be interfering with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So that night, went
to the hardware store
and I bought a roll
of metal duct tape,
and I just taped
it across the bed,
I threw a wire out the window.
And I had a ground rod outside,
I connected it to the ground
on one side, and connected
it to the metal duct tape
that I had laid on the bed.
So when I laid down
on the duct tape,
I was like, grounded, because
it was connected to the Earth.
I woke up the next morning,
and I thought, holy cow,
there's something going on here.
Because normally, for me to go
to sleep, I had to take Advil.
So I tried to find
out what I could.
The internet was
hardly anything.
This was back in '99.
Went down to the
University of Arizona
into one of their
medical libraries,
and there was nothing.
In fact, I even tried
to find the cause
of chronic pain, the cause
of MS, which was unknown,
the cause of arthritis, unknown.
They didn't know.
Nobody knew.
So I thought, well,
I'll go out to LA.
I'll go to UCLA and ask them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
They pretty much
laughed me off campus.
They said, you expect us to
believe that somebody is going
to put a nail in the ground, tie
a wire around somebody's toe,
and it's going to
make him sleep better?
They said, get out of here.
Go away.
You're nuts.
So I ended up having to
put together my own study.
And we grounded 60 people,
and the reports that came in
were unbelievable.
TMJ disappeared, PMS
disappeared, inflammation,
reduced pain,
everybody slept better.
Found an anesthesiologist
in San Diego.
He says, I don't think there's
anything to what you're doing.
This has got to be
an anomaly here.
But I'll entertain you, he says.
I will prove that you're wrong.
And we did the study.
It's the first study that I
did that was a legitimate study
where we had quantifiable data.
Then we decided, well, we're
going to do a big study now.
And we ended up attracting
scientists, physicists.
When they saw the
study, everybody
said, wow, this is really
pretty interesting.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I didn't know
anything about grounding.
I had never heard of it at all.
But I became a new mom,
and I had my first child,
and she had colic.
And she cried, and
cried, and cried.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
First thing I did, being
a physician myself,
was take her to
the pediatrician.
And remember distinctly leaving
that pediatrician's office
with a knot in my stomach,
because the first thing
they told me is, it's a baby.
Let them cry.
Literally, the only time I
noticed that she wasn't in pain
and the only time I could soothe
her was when I was outside
and I was barefoot and
I had her in my arms.
And every time we were
outside, she relaxed.
I noticed if I
did use a stroller
or if she was in a
car, she was still
in pain and uncomfortable.
This is not placebo effect.
Like, she had no idea if I
was wearing shoes or not.
She doesn't know that.
I'm holding her either way.
And I just slowly
started realizing,
this child can only
take a nap and feel
comfort is if she was on
my skin, held skin to skin,
and I was barefoot.
She'd be dead asleep, and
if I stepped in the house
and took both my feet off the
ground, she would wake back up
and the pain response
would come back.
And I didn't know it was called,
and I didn't at that time
feel comfortable
thinking about using it
in my conventional
medical practice,
but I just knew that
this is what I'm
going to do to help my child.
I was working with
a mentor of mine,
and she recommended
that I ground my energy.
I didn't know what she
meant by ground yourself,
so the first thing I did
was go home and look it up
on the internet, and through
doing a search about grounding,
I found Clint Ober's work
and the book about earthing,
and I realized that it's a
real thing and a real healing
modality with tons of
medical literature behind it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I first learned about
grounding maybe 12,
13 years ago through one of the
trainers for the Tour de France
team in the US, and he was using
it with many of their athletes
and with surprising results.
And I think surprising best
summarizes my response to it,
because it didn't
seem to make sense.
I think I became
a believer once I
started to explore the science.
>> If you take a microscope
and you look at a piece of wood
and you go down, down,
down, all of a sudden,
there's nothing there.
There is molecules.
But they're not even connected.
What's holding them together?
What's the force that's
holding everything together?
Our body is electrical.
This is all
electronic equipment.
The heart, the lungs,
the brain, I mean,
this is electrical equipment.
It's all electrical.
Everything is electrical.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Unbeknownst to us, we
live inside a battery.
The surface of the Earth
is charged negatively,
and the ionosphere, which
is a layer of the atmosphere
about 60 miles up, which
is ionized by the Sun,
meaning that the rays of the
Sun are so strong that they
split the molecules in
to a positive charge
and a negative charge.
The negative charge
are transferred
to the surface of the Earth
through lightning mainly,
and the positive charge
stay 60 miles up.
The problem arise when we
don't have negative charge.
So we need grounding just as we
need air and we need sunshine.
>> Stephen Sinatra, who was a
cardiologist from back east,
was attending a convention.
I sat down with
Stephen and told him
the story of what I was doing.
He said, well, if
you're affecting pain,
he says, you need to be
researching inflammation.
You don't have arthritis.
You don't have cancer.
You don't have all
these health disorders.
What you have is
chronic inflammation.
>> We have so much
inflammation in the body,
and it comes out in illnesses.
We go to a doctor with all these
complaints, but a lot of it
is silent inflammation,
including my specialty,
heart disease.
Heart disease is an
inflammatory process.
So how do we reduce
inflammation?
>> Inflammation is
produced by neutrophils,
which is a white blood cell.
You have an injury.
You have a damaged cell.
And so these white
blood cells come over
and they encapsulate
the damage cell,
and they release reactive oxygen
species, which rip electrons
from the damaged cell, and
that destroys the damaged cell.
If there's not
enough free electrons
there to reduce the
remaining radicals,
they're going to steal an
electron from a healthy cell,
and in the process, damage it.
Then the message goes
out to the immune system,
and another neutrophil
does the same thing,
eliminates that cell,
and then you end up
with a chain reaction.
>> ATP is short for
adenosine triphosphate.
It's the energy
currency of the cell.
We're bioelectrical beings.
That's the currency
of our bodies.
That's how it works.
That's how we run our
biological systems is
by generating this electrical
energy that's transferred.
And when we connect to the Earth
through a conductive surface
in some way, there's a
transfer of electrons that's
slowly going to our body.
In situations where we are
insulating ourselves from this,
a surplus of electrons
enter a body,
we're going to get
the absolute opposite.
So instead of having low
levels of inflammation
in a thin blood, we'll
have thick blood that's
more likely to clot and
our levels of inflammation
tend to increase.
>> You could take anybody
who has chronic pain,
doesn't who they are,
doesn't matter what's wrong,
and ground them, and you're
going to have a significant
reduction in pain.
You're going to
stop the oxidation
or the inflamed portion.
That stops almost immediately.
Then the body can heal
and return to normal.
And healing generally
is improved by 60%, 70%.
If inflammation is the cause
of all these health disorders,
then I know that not grounding
is the cause of inflammation.
Because if the body is grounded,
you can't have inflammation.
>> Can we measure the
effects reproducibility?
The answer to that is yes.
We now have 20 studies.
>> There's like, yeah,
20, 21 published studies
in the medical literature
on earthing and grounding.
And this is peer-reviewed stuff.
In simple terms, what earthing
thing does is literally,
it squenches the
fires of inflammation.
And if inflammation is the
source of all root illnesses,
including Alzheimer's disease,
cancer, heart disease,
diabetes, I mean, the
list goes on and on,
if you can impact inflammation,
and squelch it, kill it, stop
it, we're going to
be healthier beings.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So like, why hasn't it
caught on in mainstream?
I can only say it will.
>> There is a well-established
traditional conventional system
that relies on
expensive intervention.
And so they'd like
to perpetuate that,
and they're not too
interested in having
some competition
coming in for a lot
less expensive to sort of
sabotage their profit levels.
Because their goal
isn't to help humanity.
Their goal is really,
as corporations,
is increase their profit.
>> The question becomes how
much of an influence has lack
of grounding been in the
epidemic of disease that we
have.
Is this grounding a factor?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The light switch
went on, and I thought,
we're doing things
completely backwards here.
A typical day for a child
is completely ungrounded.
Most children wake up sleeping
on a bed that was not grounded,
in a house or a building
or on a floor that
was insulated from the
Earth, and then they
go immediately into a
classroom that's insulated.
And even on recess, in
their recess period,
they go outside
and are literally
fenced in and are
paved with asphalt.
And then they have after school
activities, which are either
indoors, or if
they're outdoors, they
are literally required
to wear protective gear.
Even if they're exercising
for two hours after school,
100% disconnected
from the Earth.
And then they go home, and they
go inside, and they eat dinner,
and they do homework
all hours of the night,
and then they pass out
in an ungrounded bed.
So that's a 24-hour period of
time completely ungrounded,
and that goes on day,
after day, after day.
>> There is resistance to
integrating novel thoughts.
And many times, new
ideas aren't implemented
until the people who hold
the counter opinion die.
>> The good thing about
grounding is that you
don't need a doctor
to tell you to do it.
You do not need a physician
to recommend it to you.
You can try this any time.
It is your birthright because
you live on the Earth.
>> I ground every day.
Hey, I want to be connected
to the Earth as much as I can.
>> I would say about 95%
of the day, I am grounded.
>> Because I believe
it's just a no-brainer.
Go outdoors, take your
shoes off, stand barefoot
on the Earth or sit on
the Earth, put your feet
and your hands on the Earth,
and you will instantly
notice the pain and inflammation
begin to drain from your body.
I got my life back,
is probably really
the most common
refrain that I hear.
Thank you, I got my life back.
I got my life back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]